[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Vulture's dumb luck and not his strategic genius.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, if Mahatma Gandhi was around today, what would he have made of the world
[Amit Varma]: we live in?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is the second of my two-part mini-series on Mahatma Gandhi and my guest is the great
[Amit Varma]: historian Ramachandra Guha.
[Amit Varma]: The previous episode dealt with Gandhi's years in Porbandar, Rajkot, London and South Africa
[Amit Varma]: and this one takes the story forward.
[Amit Varma]: Without further ado, let's get straight to a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: My conversation with Ram begins right after that.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs, home decor like cushion covers and
[Amit Varma]: table runners and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products including fridge magnets
[Amit Varma]: with some stunning motifs and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vazvo X Vazvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip
[Amit Varma]: Sharma, Shruti Nelson and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting but even if you want to buy
[Amit Varma]: just for yourself or a friend, head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: That's IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, in the last episode, we spoke about Gandhi before India.
[Amit Varma]: Before we really get further into today's episode, I'd like to speak a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: Guha before Gandhi.
[Guest]: How did you become a historian?
[Guest]: Well, there is a chapter accidents.
[Guest]: So you know, I grew up wanting to play cricket and I did science in school.
[Guest]: But I knew that if you do science in college, you have practicals in the afternoon, you
[Guest]: can't get the college cricket team.
[Guest]: So I registered for economics.
[Guest]: I was interested in writing, I did for the school magazine, my high school magazine.
[Guest]: And if I'd had guts, I would have gone and done a BA in English literature, but I didn't
[Guest]: have the guts because I came from a family of scientists and literature was a stretch
[Guest]: too far.
[Guest]: It is economics being a kind of pseudoscience.
[Guest]: Let me tell you a joke about economics as a pseudoscience, which is told by the great
[Guest]: historian of Islam, Bernard Lewis.
[Guest]: And he says that in the history of humankind, science is often emerged out of magic.
[Guest]: From astrology came astronomy, from alchemy came chemistry, what will come out of economics?
[Guest]: Okay, so it's at least a pseudoscience and it sort of placated my parents and my grandparents.
[Guest]: And but I was spectacularly useless at economics.
[Guest]: I did a BA, did an MA, I took a gap, what's now called a gap year, looked around.
[Guest]: And in that gap year, I discovered the works of the anthropologist Verrier Elwin and was
[Guest]: lucky enough to get a PhD admission in sociology.
[Guest]: So economics was moving me.
[Guest]: So essentially, economics is really abstract and analytical and mathematical.
[Guest]: Sociology is about human beings, but in society and with kind of an overlay of structures
[Guest]: determining them.
[Guest]: And then from there, I moved to history, which is process and then finally to biography,
[Guest]: which is actually a single individual life.
[Guest]: But my degrees are really in economics and sociology and it was in the course of my research
[Guest]: on really environmental subjects that I got interested in the history of forests and then
[Guest]: I fell in love with the archives and the joy of discovering old documents nobody has ever
[Guest]: seen before and pouring over them to consume me.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of became an accidental historian.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written somewhere about how, you know, in 1998, I think it was and you were
[Amit Varma]: really known as someone who's written books on environmental history and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it was in New York where you were asked, would you give a class on something
[Amit Varma]: in Berkeley?
[Amit Varma]: In Berkeley?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of choosing environmentalism as your subject, you picked Gandhi, why?
[Guest]: So I'd been, I'd started reading around Gandhi, I mean, you know, as what happened was, I'd
[Guest]: been working on the environment.
[Guest]: And my first book was a history of the Chipko movement and the two great leaders of the
[Guest]: Chipko movement, both fortunately alive, both in the late 80s, Tandir Prasad Bhatt and Sundar
[Guest]: Lal Bahguna, kind of exemplified the best kind of living Gandhianism.
[Guest]: They were men of transparency, integrity, moral courage, nonviolent, you know, innovatively
[Guest]: using Gandhian methods to protect the Himalayan forests.
[Guest]: And so I started reading about Gandhi.
[Guest]: I mean, those days, when I'm talking about the 70s and the 80s, I don't travel much by
[Guest]: train anymore.
[Guest]: So it's probably, but I'm sure it's not the case.
[Guest]: In the 70s and the 80s, you had these railway bookstores with A. H. Wheeler, and they often
[Guest]: had books published by Navjeevan.
[Guest]: And just in the 80s and 90s, I picked up a large number of books all about Gandhi.
[Guest]: And there were two books that profoundly struck me.
[Guest]: One was a book edited by an anthologist called R. K. Prabhu, it's called Truth, Call Them
[Guest]: Differently, which is about the correspondence between Tagore and Gandhi over a long period.
[Guest]: And the other is a book called An Atheist with Gandhi, which was by a Andhra social
[Guest]: reformer who worked on the emancipation of Dalits called Gora Ramchandra Rao, G. Ramchandra
[Guest]: Rao, known as Gora.
[Guest]: And I got more interested in Gandhi outside the environment.
[Guest]: You know, Gandhi as a thinker on religion, morality, civilization.
[Guest]: And then I read Ambedkar's great book, Annihilation of Caste, which is, of course, also a fantastic
[Guest]: polemic against Gandhi.
[Guest]: And then I came up against some of the limitations of Gandhi's whole social reform movement.
[Guest]: And it was really these three tracks, Ambedkar's Annihilation of Caste, Gora's book An Atheist
[Guest]: with Gandhi, and this collection of the letters between Tagore and Gandhi, that moved me towards
[Guest]: thinking maybe I should teach a course on Gandhi.
[Guest]: I'm bored with the environment.
[Guest]: So I went to Berkeley.
[Guest]: And then that course worked out incredibly well.
[Guest]: And I had students of very different backgrounds, different nationalities.
[Guest]: There was a Burmese student, a Japanese student, an African-American student.
[Guest]: And ever since, I've been kind of consumed with Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, since you initially got attracted to Gandhianism, which, of course, is a distillation
[Amit Varma]: of his best ideas and values that survive.
[Amit Varma]: And you actually wrote these books on the man himself with all his complexities and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the dark sides and so on.
[Amit Varma]: How did you come to look at Gandhi and Gandhianism differently?
[Guest]: So I mean, I think we discussed some of this in the, you know, in the first episode.
[Guest]: I think Gandhi, if you look at Gandhi in the context of the India of today, I think clearly
[Guest]: interfaith harmony, relations of mutual respect, accommodation between Hindus and Muslims are
[Guest]: of yet still of crucial importance, though, you know, the ruling classes today kind of
[Guest]: denied and want to move us more and more in the direction of a Hindu state.
[Guest]: I mean, today's newspaper talks about the citizenship bill, which will give, you know,
[Guest]: citizenship rights to anyone who's a Hindu from anywhere, basically, is what he says,
[Guest]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Which is kind of a denial of Gandhi's more universalistic philosophy.
[Guest]: We're recording on Jan 8, by the way.
[Guest]: The other thing, Amit, is that, look, for Gandhi, Hinduism was fallible.
[Guest]: So every religion, every national tradition was fallible.
[Guest]: You looked in the mirror of the other and improved yourself.
[Guest]: Hinduism was fallible because we treated our untouchables and our women badly, right?
[Guest]: India was fallible because, you know, our institutions didn't work well.
[Guest]: Of course, in those days, there wasn't that much corruption.
[Guest]: I think this understanding of Gandhi that individuals are fallible, cultures are fallible,
[Guest]: communities are fallible, religious traditions are fallible, nations are fallible, I think
[Guest]: is vitally important today, which is kind of an absolute lack of respect for criticisms
[Guest]: of religions or communities or individuals.
[Guest]: I mean, Modi is infallible, Hinduism is infallible, Bharat Mata is infallible, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: is completely contrary to Gandhi's teaching.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, we think it absolutes today, but you know, as we'll probably discuss later
[Amit Varma]: in the episode, to some extent, Gandhi also did, he was dogmatic about a lot of things,
[Amit Varma]: but we'll kind of come to that.
[Amit Varma]: So your book, Gandhi, The Years That Changed The World, really takes us, begins where your
[Amit Varma]: last book ended, Gandhi Before India, where he's arrived back in India, and he's just
[Amit Varma]: chatted with his mentor and someone he really admired, Gopal Krishna Gokhale.
[Amit Varma]: And Gokhale told him that, look, for a year, I just want you to go around the country,
[Amit Varma]: don't open your mouth, don't give opinions, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Why do you think Gokhale gave him this advice?
[Guest]: I think Gokhale gave him that advice, because he'd been away for so long, he'd been away
[Guest]: from India for 22 years, and he didn't understand the landscape.
[Guest]: Even when he was in India, all he knew was Gujarat and Bombay.
[Guest]: I mean, he'd been to Calcutta once for a Congress, he'd been to Madras once to address a meeting,
[Guest]: he'd been to Pune once, but I think Gokhale thought that he must understand the country
[Guest]: he's going to spend the rest of his life in.
[Guest]: The other reason, though, it's probably not spelled out by Gokhale, was Gokhale, we again
[Guest]: discussed in the first episode, Hind Swaraj, Gokhale was profoundly ambivalent about Hind
[Guest]: Swaraj.
[Guest]: He thought it an ideologically utopian fact, and he perhaps felt that if Gandhi was to
[Guest]: come be confronted with ground realities in India, he would nuance and modify some of
[Guest]: the extreme positions he took in Hind Swaraj.
[Guest]: In fact, that's exactly what happened.
[Guest]: And I think it was very wise advice for him, and he traveled all over, I mean, he would
[Guest]: just track his journeys in those days, and train travel was incredibly arduous in those
[Guest]: days.
[Guest]: He often went with Kasturba.
[Guest]: Many of those journeys were with Kasturba, some were alone.
[Guest]: But he went north, south, east, west, he went to Shantiniketan, he went to Banaras, he went
[Guest]: to Gurukul Kangri, he came to Madras, he went deep south to places like Mayavaram and Tirunelveli
[Guest]: where he was confronted with the horrors of untouchability for the first time in a direct
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: He traveled through his native Kathiawar, up and down, Gondal, Porbandar, Rajkot, Wadawan
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: And I think he came to understand this country he had come back to and whose politics he
[Guest]: wanted to immerse himself in.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, in your book, you mentioned that he was also asked to give opinions on something
[Amit Varma]: or speak about something during this period.
[Amit Varma]: But even though Gokhale had died a month into this journey, he respected the promise he
[Guest]: had made.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And it's only his, you know, voluntary vow of silence on political and social matters
[Guest]: was in January 1916, that vow was no longer valid.
[Guest]: And it's only then that he started speaking, of course, the most, his coming out speech
[Guest]: is in Banaras when he attacks the Indian elite for their luxurious lifestyles, their jewelry
[Guest]: and the craven worship of the colonial ethos and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a full year before he speaks up.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that in a sense, he is now faced with the challenge of making once
[Amit Varma]: again, a particular journey that he had already made in the sense when he went to South Africa,
[Amit Varma]: when he began campaigning for the Indians there, he was a representative of the elites,
[Amit Varma]: which is the Gujarati merchants and the Parsis and not the laborers at that point in time.
[Amit Varma]: But then he turned it into within the limited scope of the Indians that were in South Africa,
[Amit Varma]: what you could call a bit of a mass movement, where all the Tamilians came on board, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And now, as you point out at the start of this book, he shifted from an arena where
[Amit Varma]: there are 150,000 Indians to an arena where there are 300 million Indians, and the movement
[Amit Varma]: as it was in his early days in South Africa, is really an elite movement still, can you
[Amit Varma]: lay out the landscape for me at the time, like, what is the freedom movement like?
[Guest]: So what there is the Indian National Congress, which is now 30 years old, by the time as
[Guest]: Gandhi has come, it's clearly grown quite substantially in numbers, it's had a meeting
[Guest]: every year, its membership has expanded.
[Guest]: Several years before Gandhi comes in 1907, there's a major split in the Congress between
[Guest]: the extremists and the moderates, the extremists, led by Tilak, who want militant action now,
[Guest]: the moderates led by Gokhale, who feel not only that you can appeal to the better instincts
[Guest]: of the British through reason and argument, but also that social reform is crucial, whereas
[Guest]: the extremists led by Tilak felt, feel that social reform will come after political independence.
[Guest]: So there's a split. And when Gandhi comes back, there's an attempt to heal this split.
[Guest]: Tilak has returned, he was in jail in Mandalay, he's come back, and there's an attempt to
[Guest]: heal the split and bring the moderates and extremists on one platform.
[Guest]: The other split that has happened in the Congress from the time it started is that when it started,
[Guest]: it was both Hindu and Muslim intellectuals and aristocrats were in it. It was an elite
[Guest]: organization, but it had both Hindu and Muslim elites. This changed, I mean, Syed Ahmed Khan
[Guest]: moved away from the Congress, many Muslims moved away. In 1906, the Muslim League was
[Guest]: formed and there's an attempt in Gandhi's first years in India to bring Muslims back.
[Guest]: So in 1916, which is a year after Gandhi comes back, there's a meeting in Lucknow of the
[Guest]: Congress, which Gandhi attends, where Jinnah and Tilak forge a kind of compact between
[Guest]: the Congress and the Muslim League. Now, what is interesting is that Gandhi attends the
[Guest]: 1915 Congress in Bombay, the Congress in those days, the annual Congress was held in December
[Guest]: in those days. End of his first year, he attends that Congress. End of the second year, he
[Guest]: attends the Lucknow Congress. And in both places, he's a marginal figure. All he's allowed
[Guest]: to speak on is indentured labor in South Africa. He can't speak on political reform, constitutional
[Guest]: change, Hindu-Muslim collaboration, none of these issues. He's really a marginal figure
[Guest]: who's on, you know, in kind of some small hall somewhere in an obscure part of the big
[Guest]: conference. The great leaders are Annie Besant, Malviya, Tilak, Jinnah, you know, and so on
[Guest]: and so forth. Gokhale, of course, dies shortly after Gandhi comes back. And Bipin Chandrapal,
[Guest]: you know, Lajpat Rai, and they're the kind of leaders of the Congress at that stage.
[Guest]: And he really is a very marginal figure. But he knows he's looking for his chance. I mean,
[Guest]: I think Gandhi is a person of great ambition. We briefly alluded to this in our first episode.
[Guest]: He comes back from South Africa because he wants to claim a larger stage. He wants for
[Guest]: himself a greater historic role. It's not in his, he has proved to himself that he can
[Guest]: lead 150,000 diasporic Indians in South Africa. And at some level, he's bored and disenchanted
[Guest]: with this. He wants to move on to bigger things. And he comes back. But clearly he's patient.
[Guest]: Gokhale has told him to understand the country. He tours for a year. He starts speaking briefly
[Guest]: on these issues. 1915-16, he's on the margins. And the first major opportunity comes in 1917
[Guest]: when he goes to Champaran and gets involved in, you know, the struggle of the Indigo tenants
[Guest]: there. And he comes face to face with agrarian distress, what we would today call agrarian
[Guest]: distress, right? And in a way in which neither Tilak, nor Gokhale, nor Jinnah, nor any Besant,
[Guest]: nor any of the leaders of Congress had ever had a clue of how the peasants lived and labored.
[Guest]: And Gandhi, in those three months in Champaran, understands that the real problem of India
[Guest]: is, lies outside the cities. And if India is to really, you know, if a political action
[Guest]: in India must bring in peasants, which the Congress till that stage has not been able
[Amit Varma]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: So before we talk further about Champaran, which I want to do, just a thought that struck
[Amit Varma]: me when you spoke about Gandhi's ambition, and it's probably an outrageous question,
[Amit Varma]: but do you think that self-delusion is a necessary condition to attain greatness? What I mean
[Amit Varma]: by that is no one starts out great, you know, and people always imagine themselves to be
[Amit Varma]: more than they are at the time, and some people overreach and fall flat, but some people just
[Amit Varma]: keep going driven by their delusion till they actually achieve greatness.
[Guest]: Well, I would rather call it self-belief. I mean, the belief may be delusory. In many
[Guest]: cases, it may be delusory, you know, that actually you may get nowhere in your career.
[Guest]: But self-belief is, Gandhi clearly had it. He had it from an early age. It was confirmed
[Guest]: by his associates in South Africa, his friend Ranjeevan Mehta, who announced him a Mahatma
[Guest]: well before Tagore does and so on. But I think the only explanation for Gandhi leaving South
[Guest]: Africa and coming back to India is that he wants to be the leader of all of India. He's
[Guest]: not content with being the leader of a small expatriate community.
[Amit Varma]: And in some sense, much as the death of Gokhale is a shock to him, does it also free him in
[Guest]: some way?
[Guest]: Very much so, very much so. So I think Gokhale was a kind of person he enormously venerated.
[Guest]: So Gokhale wasn't that much older than him. He was only three years older than Gandhi
[Guest]: in terms of calendar years. But in terms of political career, he had achieved eminence
[Guest]: far before Gandhi. And his death does free him because Gokhale would probably have wanted
[Guest]: him to stay within the servants of Indian society, focus on social reform, not really
[Guest]: go out and work among the peasantry, let alone, you know, craft programs of All India Satyagraha.
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to say, but Gokhale was just short of 50 when he died. So, you know,
[Guest]: if he lived another 10 years, I think Gandhi's career may not have blossomed in the way it
[Amit Varma]: did.
[Amit Varma]: And in the last episode, we discussed how so often consequential events are contingent,
[Amit Varma]: you know, lucky things happen. Like in this case, while reading your book, what struck
[Amit Varma]: me is you, you talk about someone from Champaran, Rajkumar Shukla, who went to the Congress
[Amit Varma]: meetings and he tried to speak to the big leaders and get them to come to Champaran.
[Amit Varma]: They showed absolutely no interest. And as you point out, Gandhi was kind of marginal
[Amit Varma]: and he approached Gandhi once and Gandhi said, no, I'm not interested. He approached Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: twice. Gandhi said no. And then he followed Gandhi all the way to Ahmedabad. Yeah. And
[Amit Varma]: then finally Gandhi like, okay, whatever, you know, let's check it out. It kind of happened
[Amit Varma]: like that, that he, you know, it wasn't as if he was seeking to discover what agrarian
[Amit Varma]: crisis is like. He just gave in to the persistent demands of the gentleman and went along to
[Amit Varma]: Champaran and then he saw what was happening and got involved.
[Guest]: Yeah. And then he, once he got involved, he was incredibly excited. I mean, there's some
[Guest]: letter I quote, I think it's to Pollack where he says, I'm reliving the excitement of my
[Guest]: South African days. You know, I have my Kachalia, I have my so-and-so, I'm looking for my Pollack
[Guest]: and my, and so on. And because he'd been three years away from political action and Champaran
[Guest]: gave him this opportunity to craft a movement, to represent people, to become their spokesman,
[Guest]: to mediate between them and the ruling authorities. You know, he became a hero in his native Gujarat
[Guest]: because he disobeyed the deportation order that was issued to him and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I think Champaran is that way very important. You know, people in Champaran make today have
[Guest]: this criticism of Gandhi, which is a legitimate criticism that we launched him on his political
[Guest]: career and then he abandoned us. You know, he didn't really come back hard to Champaran
[Guest]: and find out what was going on. But in the larger history of Indian nationalism, Champaran
[Guest]: is a very important milestone. And just because of the role it played in Gandhi's life.
[Amit Varma]: And just to fill my listeners in what was happening in Champaran was it was, there was
[Amit Varma]: basically an agitation by indigo farmers because, because of the world war demand for indigo
[Amit Varma]: had shot up. So, you know, the British wanted much more indigo. And one of the particularly
[Amit Varma]: problematic clauses was that they insisted that poor peasants had to devote a certain
[Amit Varma]: percentage, I think 10% of their land to, you know, planting indigo among various other
[Amit Varma]: clauses, which were coercive and just flat out wrong. And what Gandhi did when he got
[Amit Varma]: there was that he essentially traveled around the place and collected tens of thousands
[Amit Varma]: of signatures and then petitioned the government successfully. And he won that particular battle.
[Guest]: Yeah. Yeah. I mean, substantially, he won that battle that the onerous restrictions
[Guest]: were removed by a lot. And it, you know, it also gave him a chance to understand the colonial
[Guest]: state and its functioning apart from coming face to face with agrarian distress and how
[Guest]: peasants lived and labored. It gave him this understanding of the mechanics of the colonial
[Guest]: regime, which of course he was later to use to good effect.
[Amit Varma]: And also like you mentioned that letter where he writes to Pollack, where he says that I
[Amit Varma]: will find my tambi Naidu here and I will find so and so here. And it's very interesting
[Amit Varma]: that during this period of time, Champaran and the year that follows, he finds a lot
[Amit Varma]: of people who were his close associates through the years that follow, like in Champaran J.B.
[Amit Varma]: Kripalani, then Rajinder Prasad, then as news of it got back to Gujarat, you know, Vallabhbhai
[Amit Varma]: Patel approached him there. And you can see this group of people now building around him,
[Amit Varma]: recognizing him as a leader through the sheer moral force of his actions.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And the moral force and the moral courage. I mean, apart from the names you
[Guest]: mentioned, I think Mahadev Desai, who was to be his lifelong companion, secretary, interlocutor,
[Guest]: advisor, right hand man, left hand man, also joins in the same year, 1917. So 1917 is very,
[Guest]: very important.
[Amit Varma]: And tactically, how did the British approach Gandhi? Did they take him seriously?
[Guest]: I think they were puzzled. I mean, the British were intrigued and puzzled. I mean, some clearly
[Guest]: saw him as an unscrupulous agitator out there to create mischief. But there are several
[Guest]: others. I think he's called Haycock. He's a district magistrate who says he's a yogi
[Guest]: of the type, not unknown in the East, through his asceticism and his simple lifestyle, impresses
[Guest]: and moves people. So clearly, some of them were very impressed. Some of them were hostile
[Guest]: and angry. And this stroke of ambivalence runs right through the British reaction to
[Guest]: Gandhi in India. There are people who detest him, who demonize him, British officials from
[Guest]: the Viceroy downwards. And there's some who quite do respect and admire him. I mean, a
[Guest]: little later in the story is 1922, when he's tried for sedition and comes up before Judge
[Guest]: Broomfield, who says, you know, you're altogether different from any other person I've tried.
[Guest]: You know, in the eyes of the law, you may be a criminal, but in the eyes of many of
[Guest]: your countrymen, you're a great hero. And no one would be happier than I if your sentence
[Guest]: is kind of, you know, curtailed or just, you know, reduced or withdrawn. Now, I think,
[Guest]: you know, this is, of course, a theme for a separate podcast. And I mean, British state
[Guest]: was also composed of human beings. You know, it was not just one abstract, unified, homogeneous
[Guest]: entity out purely to do evil and oppress and brutalize the Indians. There were people there
[Guest]: who empathize with Indian aspirations. There were people there who recognized the extraordinary
[Guest]: person that Gandhi was. And on the other hand, there were people who were unfeeling, unreasoning,
[Guest]: dismissive, arrogant, racist. And I think the variety of British reactions to Gandhi
[Guest]: in India, let alone the variety of British reactions to Gandhi in Britain, which is also
[Guest]: an interesting parallel story in these decades, is I think, is quite fascinating to the historian,
[Amit Varma]: because there's no single British reaction to Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that in the beginning, they sort of underestimate him, like you point
[Amit Varma]: out how after that first speech he gave, you quote the chief secretary when they're debating
[Amit Varma]: what to do about him. And he says, quote, cold water seems better than the martyr's
[Amit Varma]: stake. And they sort of decide to ignore him because they don't think he'll have much impact.
[Amit Varma]: And you see this play out over the next 30 years, like even the salt march, for example,
[Guest]: they actually allowed him to reach Gandhi, which was again much debated at the time.
[Guest]: A spectacular act of misjudgment by Irwin who thought that, you know, what is this salt
[Guest]: business and what is this old man going on a march? Just ignore it. Not realizing the
[Guest]: enormous symbolic significance of what Gandhi was trying to do and the way in which with
[Guest]: every successive day of the march, he would capture the imagination and, and the loyalty
[Amit Varma]: and affection of more and more Indians.
[Amit Varma]: Now, shortly after Champaran, another sort of seminal event happens, which is that labor
[Amit Varma]: dispute where he, uh, uh, you know, takes a side of some laborers against a factory
[Amit Varma]: owner, Ambalal Sarabhai, who had actually donated money for his ashram and helped him
[Amit Varma]: to kind of survive there. And the labor leaders are led by, um, uh, Ambalal Sarabhai's sister
[Amit Varma]: Anusuya Ben and he gets together with her. And, you know, one interesting, again, you
[Amit Varma]: know, speaking of contingency and luck, how things sometimes happen is that after a few
[Amit Varma]: days of the agitation, the workers pointed out that, how can you empathize with us? We
[Amit Varma]: are starving. You are going to your fancy house every day and eating a meal.
[Amit Varma]: And then Gandhi said, okay, I will fast. Yeah. And that's how his whole tradition of fasting
[Amit Varma]: begins with Gandhi as a response, as a tactical response to this criticism rather than. Yeah.
[Guest]: So he had Gandhi had fasted before, but that was against the disciples in his ashram for
[Guest]: violating the code of the ashram. You know, his son fell in love. One of his sons, Manilal
[Guest]: fell in love in South Africa, you know, was having some kind of, uh, relationship that
[Guest]: Gandhi felt was illicit and breaking the code of the ashram, Brahmacharya code of the ashram
[Guest]: and he went on fast and so on. This was his first quasi social or political fast.
[Guest]: And he was stung by the criticism. I think, uh, there's a, uh, Anusuya Ben who was Ambalal's
[Guest]: sister, but on the other side with the workers and Gandhi to travel in a car with the splendid
[Guest]: name of an overland roadster. So we had cars were very rare in the Ambala and cars really
[Guest]: denoted privilege. Only the Maharajas had cars, right? So here is this so-called Fakir
[Guest]: leader, the people, you know, going in a car and the worker said, Hey, what is going on?
[Amit Varma]: And he was stung by that. And taking off from the, how did the spiritual persona that he
[Amit Varma]: later came to adopt, like how did being called the Mahatma in terms of optics, the way he
[Amit Varma]: dressed and you, you know, the simplicity with which he essentially portrayed himself
[Amit Varma]: and mostly lived, um, how did that help him in becoming the sort of political superstar?
[Guest]: I think very much, uh, I mean, because to go back to, uh, uh, our earlier discussion
[Guest]: a few minutes ago about the Congress party, I mean, the Congress party, whether it was
[Guest]: Gokhale, who was reason and moderation or Tilak, who was fired and brimstone and angry
[Guest]: rhetoric, they were really divorced from the life of the ordinary people.
[Guest]: I mean, Tilak had a following among the workers of Bombay, but he didn't live in the Charles.
[Guest]: I mean, he still lived with middle-class people and occasionally went to the Charles to give
[Guest]: a lecture. I think Gandhi's completely declassed lifestyle, you know, he declass himself totally
[Guest]: in terms of his lifestyle. Again, Champaran is very important there because he lives with
[Guest]: peasants, he travels with them and that kind of asceticism, the willingness to do away
[Guest]: with all luxuries. And which is why when it was pointed out to him that he was traveling
[Guest]: in a car, he abandoned that for the, for the, while the strike was on in Ahmedabad, but
[Guest]: it marked him out from all other political leaders of the time, the other political leaders
[Guest]: of the time were really elitist and disconnected from the everyday lives of peasants, workers,
[Guest]: tribals, Dalits, Adivasis, you know, pastoralists, artisans, and Gandhi at least had some connection
[Amit Varma]: to how those people lived.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you also point out how Gandhi in a short span of time, uh, achieved this
[Amit Varma]: mass popularity, almost like, um, you know, the way memes spread today, achieved this
[Amit Varma]: mass popularity and became a huge figure in days when there was not only no internet or
[Amit Varma]: social media, but no television, even like no radio, even no radio, even effectively.
[Amit Varma]: So how did, how did this man just become a national figure in the span of a few months
[Guest]: without all of this?
[Guest]: Few years, I mean, I think more few years than few months. I think, you know, there
[Guest]: was already a, a press, uh, and a burgeoning vernacular press, not just in English, but
[Guest]: in different Indian languages. And it's, you know, the press was often, uh, issues of newspapers
[Guest]: were often read out, you know, that, uh, under a tree in a village, you know, the one little
[Guest]: person would read out the news, but it is, even then it is quite extraordinary.
[Guest]: I mean, uh, I'd say by 1920, uh, Gandhi was known in every part of India, except the Northeast.
[Guest]: I mean, in Assam, yes, but not in Nagaland and Meghalaya and Mizoram and Manipur, but
[Guest]: except the Northeast, he was known in every part of India and he was known in every part
[Guest]: of India or the impression or the perception of him in every part of India was, this is
[Guest]: a man who's transparent, honest, courageous, simple, and he's here to fight for our rights.
[Guest]: And that is quite extraordinary. I mean, that it essentially from 1917, which is his first
[Guest]: movement in Jampal and in three years, that's how far his fame spreads. And whereas, uh,
[Guest]: Tilak would have been known in the cities. Tilak would have been known in Bombay, in
[Guest]: Calcutta, probably in Lahore, but not in the countryside.
[Amit Varma]: And how much did it help Gandhi that in, uh, you know, during the Champaran thing, and
[Amit Varma]: then during the, um, the passive resistance that took place against the Rowlatt Act, uh,
[Amit Varma]: that Tilak was out of the country for some of this period. So Gandhi almost became a
[Amit Varma]: de facto leader of the movement.
[Guest]: Very much. Again, it goes back to just luck, pure luck. Gokhale's early death freed Gandhi
[Guest]: for a life of radical action rather than, uh, you know, constraining him or confining
[Guest]: him within the realm of social reform and Tilak's absence, you know, allowed Gandhi
[Guest]: to become the undisputed leader of, uh, the Rowlatt Satyagraha. I mean, Tilak was the
[Guest]: Rowlatt Satyagraha, which was, uh, Gandhi's first all India campaign, uh, was launched
[Guest]: when Tilak was in London, fighting a court case and Tilak, who was the leader of the
[Guest]: militant tendency in the Congress, as we've already discussed, would have become the default
[Guest]: front of this movement.
[Guest]: Gandhi not had to go to London. By the time he returns, Gandhi has already captured, you
[Guest]: know, the national imagination and Tilak is generous enough to praise him. Uh, and, uh,
[Guest]: a year later, Tilak himself dies and Gandhi is lucky to be in Bombay at the time of Tilak's
[Guest]: funeral and he can, you know, he, uh, cremation and he can be one of the pallbearers. So there's
[Guest]: a kind of symbolic transference from Tilak to Gandhi. So Tilak's absence in 1919, Tilak's
[Guest]: death in 1920, uh, again, in retrospect, very fortuitous for them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the sort of big moves that happens, not just for Gandhi, but for
[Amit Varma]: the Congress and for India itself is what seems on the surface is almost bizarre alliance
[Amit Varma]: that, um, Gandhi, um, gets into with the Ali brothers who are in the Khilafat movement.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, the world war one has ended. Turkey is lost. Uh, the caliphate is gone
[Amit Varma]: basically. And, um, you know, the Ali brothers and people around them are starting this Khilafat
[Amit Varma]: movement demanding from the empire that they sort of bring the caliphate back. Now, through
[Amit Varma]: this entire period of time, which we now forget the Muslims of India are also facing in a
[Amit Varma]: sense, a crisis of dual identity that they feel that they are part of this larger calm,
[Amit Varma]: this greater Muslim nation. And at the same time, there is a fight on for Indian nationhood,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and, and how does this conflict sort of play out? How has it played out until
[Guest]: that point? So, uh, the Khilafat is abolished during the world war and Turkey is opposing
[Guest]: the allies and the Ali brothers, Mohammed and Shaukat Ali, both whom studied at Muslim
[Guest]: university and charismatic orators and so on are interned in, in Chindwara, which is
[Guest]: incidentally the place where Kamal Nath comes from, or where he has his pocket burrow. He
[Amit Varma]: has his pocket burrow. And I didn't expect to hear that name during this episode, the
[Guest]: curious, uh, uh, you know, residences that places have. So they were interned and then
[Guest]: they come out of jail. Gandhi says they must be, uh, freed from house arrest and Gandhi
[Guest]: is looking for a way to build bridges with ordinary Muslims, you know, not just the Muslim
[Guest]: elite and here, of course, what Gandhi does, I mean, it's been subject to great debate
[Guest]: and it was arguably a tactical mistake for him to bring religion. So centrally Muslim,
[Guest]: the pan-Islamic, uh, loyalties of Indian Muslims. So centrally into, uh, Indian politics was
[Guest]: in retrospect a mistake because, you know, it led to all kinds of problems later on.
[Guest]: But I think the most, uh, plausible explanation for what Gandhi did lies in a classic essay
[Guest]: written by a British scholar of India called Phillips Pratt, who had studied Gandhi's life
[Guest]: very closely, who actually lived in Bangalore, married a Tamil girl and lived here. And he
[Guest]: says that, look at what Gandhi was able to do in South Africa was to build bridges with
[Guest]: the Muslims through personal friendship. So he befriended Kachalya, uh, he befriended,
[Guest]: you know, uh, uh, Dada Abdullah. And through that, he was able to bring Muslims and Hindus
[Guest]: together. I mean, he had close Muslim friends and these close Muslim friends in South Africa
[Guest]: allowed him to build a kind of trans-religious community solidarity. Now, perhaps Pratt says
[Guest]: that was easier in South Africa because the community was smaller. It was more cohesive.
[Guest]: When in the diaspora, your religious identities are relatively less important, but in India,
[Guest]: which is much larger and where the Muslims themselves are so diverse and composed of
[Guest]: so many different sects, this strategy of befriending two people to bring a whole community
[Guest]: on board failed. And, uh, uh, you know, it's, I think it's a very plausible kind of interpretation,
[Guest]: but Gandhi felt that to bring Muslims into the fold of the freedom struggle, en masse,
[Guest]: not just a few leaders, but en masse was very important that the Arya brothers could help
[Guest]: him do it. And if you know, the Khilafat had a very important sentimental and symbolic
[Guest]: place in the Muslim imagination, the Indian Muslim imagination. So the Hindus should support
[Guest]: them in that. And in exchange, the Muslims would come on board and freedom struggle.
[Guest]: They would respect Hindu sentiments, for example, on issues such as playing music before mosques
[Guest]: and cow slaughter and so on and so forth. So he did it tactically and instrumentally,
[Guest]: I think, and may not have been aware of the consequence. People warned him at the time.
[Guest]: I mean, I quote there, uh, the warnings issued by Jadunath Sarkar, who was a right-wing historian
[Guest]: and Gandhi's own friend, C.F. Andrews. He said, don't do this. They both said, don't
[Amit Varma]: do this. Don't support the Khilafat movement. And it just causes great dissonance in me
[Amit Varma]: when I read about it at Alliance, because on one hand it's philosophically incoherent
[Amit Varma]: because Gandhi's demand is for a free India. Correct. And the Ali brothers are demanding
[Amit Varma]: for a free Khilafat, which is something completely different. And India doesn't figure in that
[Amit Varma]: it's, it's a wider nation out of, but on the other hand, in the proximate term, it feels
[Amit Varma]: like a tactical masterstroke because getting the Muslims with him allows him to take control
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress party and which is therefore changed forever.
[Guest]: Absolutely. But just think of a counterfactual, I don't express it in the book. I mean, but
[Guest]: you know, to give some context to it and maybe present this Alliance in a way we can understand
[Guest]: why Gandhi reached out to the Ali brothers. Let's assume that in 1917, the Bolshevik revolution
[Guest]: happened not in Russia, but in Italy and the Vatican and the institution of the Pope was
[Guest]: abolished. All right. Now it's similar to the Khilafat in that they're Catholics in
[Guest]: India, they're Catholics in Spain, the Catholics in Philippines, they're Catholics in Thailand,
[Guest]: all of whom can be great and loyal and patriotic, high in Spanish and you know, Mozambican citizens,
[Guest]: but yet have allegiance to the institution of the Pope, who is the head of the church
[Guest]: in the Vatican in Italy. Now, what if Lenin had said, I'm in control of Italy and there's
[Guest]: no Pope, I mean, the Bolsheviks were vigorously atheistic people, right? Now, what do you
[Guest]: say in India to a Catholic who comes to you and say, says, if there was a Catholic community
[Guest]: in India, uh, as they watch the smaller numbers come at a much smaller, but let's say they
[Guest]: come to Gandhi and say, you're the leader of our freedom struggle. This is a matter
[Guest]: of great sentiment and symbolic importance to us. Please agitate for the restoration
[Amit Varma]: of the office of the Pope. I know what Amit Shah would say to them. He would say, come
[Amit Varma]: back and become Hindu. So that's the kind of analogy you would, you know, so to make
[Guest]: it more understandable and Muslim, the much larger than, uh, uh, Catholics, they were
[Guest]: much more numerous, much more important. And, uh, do you say that, uh, uh, you know, uh,
[Guest]: an Indian Catholic who goes to Rome is, uh, once in his or her lifetime is anti-patriotic
[Guest]: or the rest of the life is spent. I mean, it's kind of a symbolic, right? Okay. Okay.
[Guest]: Now come closer home. I mean, a Nepali who goes to Badrinath, right? What do you say
[Guest]: to that? You know, so, or, or a Hindu in Guyana who wants to go to Badrinath, right? And is
[Guest]: that Hindu in Guyana disloyal to the Guyanese state or is he an anti-national from the eyes
[Guest]: of Guyana because he feels that Badrinath is a Teerthan he would like to visit. So these
[Guest]: are complicated matters. And I think one should not take a black and white approach to them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I'm, I'm, I'm talking about sort of how it might have been seen by the British
[Amit Varma]: empire or how it might have felt in terms of what they were asking for. I mean, obviously
[Amit Varma]: people contain multitudes and you can be a Hindu and an Indian and a Bombayite and so
[Amit Varma]: on at the same time. Uh, another thing that strikes me is at this point in time, in the
[Amit Varma]: earlier years, you know, after Gandhi comes back and the two or three years after that,
[Amit Varma]: he's sort of a marginal figure, like you mentioned. And at that point, Jinnah is like the next
[Amit Varma]: great leader in waiting. And you know, Tilak and Annie Besant are kind of aging, the extremist
[Amit Varma]: leaders. Tilak is a great moderate leader who's expecting to sort of be Gokhale's successor
[Amit Varma]: and take over. And then suddenly this black swan event called Mahatma Gandhi just bursts
[Amit Varma]: into the scene and knocks him off the perch. And suddenly he's, he's kind of marginalized
[Amit Varma]: and does that personal hurt and his change in direction after that point change history
[Amit Varma]: substantially?
[Guest]: Yes, I think, I think it does. And it, it predates it. I mean, I, I go back, I mean,
[Guest]: most historians would talk about, of course, Gandhi's leadership of the rural Satyagraha,
[Guest]: which established him as an all India figure. And then the next year, the non-cooperation
[Guest]: movement and the meeting in Nagpur where Jinnah is shouted down by the mob of Gandhi Bhakts.
[Guest]: I mean, they were really Gandhi Bhakts, you know, who are then running the Communist Party.
[Guest]: But I would predate this to 1915. I mean, I'd, I'd say early in, in an early chapter
[Guest]: that when Gandhi comes back and there's a reception to Gandhi in Bombay by the Gujarati
[Guest]: community of Bombay and K. M. Munshi, later to be the founder of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
[Guest]: but at that time a rising lawyer and scholar, welcomes Gandhi and says, you're the greatest
[Guest]: person ever from Gujarat. And Jinnah must have been really stung by this because Jinnah
[Guest]: was a Gujarati who was in conventional terms, had a far more successful political career
[Guest]: than Gandhi. I mean, he was already a member of the Imperial Council. He was a great success
[Guest]: in the Bombay Bar, which Gandhi had conspicuously failed to be and so on. So I think there is
[Guest]: that element of personal rivalry at being overshadowed, overtaken, sidelined, marginalized
[Guest]: by a person who's a Johnny come lately and whom Jinnah clearly sees in professional terms
[Guest]: as inferior.
[Amit Varma]: And in an aside, in both your books, you mentioned that they could have been business partners.
[Guest]: Yes, yes. In 1897, they could have been business partners in South Africa. Absolutely. I mean,
[Guest]: they always had a partnership because, you know, Gandhi was in South Africa. We have
[Guest]: discussed this in the first episode. He was the only Indian lawyer. He wanted a partner
[Guest]: since a large proportion of the diasporic community in South Africa was Muslim. It made
[Guest]: sense to have a Muslim partner. And there is some very strong speculative evidence to
[Guest]: suggest that he had approached Jinnah to join him in a partnership.
[Amit Varma]: That would have been a fun counterfactual. We'll take a quick commercial break and then
[Amit Varma]: we'll come back and move away from the chronology for just a little bit to talk about caste.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody. Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM Podcast Network where IBM
[Unknown]: podcasts on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. You know, we've been doing this for a couple
[Unknown]: of weeks and I think it's working out quite well. If you're enjoying the show that you're
[Unknown]: listening to, why don't you do this? Pause the show, take a screenshot and post it to
[Unknown]: your Instagram stories, tag us on IBM podcast and leave us a comment for what you think
[Unknown]: about the show that you're listening to. We'll post that to our story so that, you know,
[Unknown]: I mean, like everybody can see what's going on, who's listening to what. Also, I have
[Unknown]: another little announcement. We are finally launching our new version of our Android app.
[Unknown]: It's going to be out officially and properly. It's going to move out of beta. So if you
[Unknown]: are listening to us on the old app, it might be time for you to kind of look for the new
[Unknown]: one. Unfortunately, it's not going to update from the old app. You're going to need to
[Unknown]: re-download the app or reinstall the app from the new listing. You'll be able to get the
[Unknown]: new app. You can link for that from either the show description of the show that you're
[Unknown]: listening to, or you could go to our website and there'll be a link over there. So we launched
[Unknown]: a new show called How to Citizen. It is hosted by policy professional Meghnaad S and comedian
[Unknown]: Shreyas Manohar. Every episode is a look back at a chapter from an 8th standard civics textbook.
[Unknown]: The first episode featuring Rohan Joshi is out now. On the Scene and the Unseen is part
[Unknown]: to Amit Verma's conversation with historian and author Ram Chandra Goa. They discuss the
[Unknown]: return of Mahatma Gandhi to India and his involvement in the freedom movement. On the
[Unknown]: Filter Coffee podcast, Karthik Nagarajan talks to Ram Ki as founder of Sports Mechanics India.
[Unknown]: They talk about how video analysis changed the face of Indian cricket and why Virendra
[Unknown]: Sehwag dedicated his Multan triple hundred to Ram Ki. On Cinemaya, our Hindi film show,
[Unknown]: filmmaker Aruna Rajepatel shares one of the most dramatic human stories of love, loss
[Unknown]: and hope with host Swati Bakshi. On Vartalaab, Naveen and Akash talk to fellow comic Aadhar
[Unknown]: Malik about his background in law and parting ways with the comedy collective SNG. And with
[Unknown]: that, let's get you back to your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen. I'm chatting with Ram Goa about Mahatma Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: years in India. And for a moment, I want to take a break from the chronology of what he
[Amit Varma]: did and how he rose to greatness and tackle one of the big themes in the book and in Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: journey and all of India, in fact, which is caste. And it's really interesting because
[Amit Varma]: through the years you see Gandhi sort of trying to come to terms with it. And I'm not convinced
[Amit Varma]: he ever did. And there are these different sort of contradictory quotes, which like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is one quote, which he gives in Mayavaran quote, if it was proof to me
[Amit Varma]: that caste is an essential part of Hinduism, I for one would declare myself an open rebel
[Amit Varma]: against Hinduism itself. Stop quote, which seems like a strong stand, but there's an
[Amit Varma]: if at the start of it. And Gandhi sort of had this, it almost seemed to me that he was
[Amit Varma]: in denial of how pervasive caste was that, you know, while, you know, Ambedkar later
[Amit Varma]: on would talk about the annihilation of caste and that it was hard coded into Hinduism itself.
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi sort of seemed to believe in something called Varna Ashram Dharma, which he cited
[Amit Varma]: when there was talk of an untouchable family entering his ashram. And he said that according
[Amit Varma]: to Varna Ashram Dharma, which he held to be valid, people of different castes can't stay
[Amit Varma]: under the same roof and eat at the same table. And he said, I'll make an exception for my
[Amit Varma]: ashram because we are not functioning under the same rules, but I'm not going to ask other
[Amit Varma]: people to sort of follow these rules. And he had a view where like the four, he once
[Amit Varma]: said, quote, he wanted to improve the caste system rather than uproot it. And his view
[Amit Varma]: seemed to be that the caste system isn't bad per se, untouchability is bad, but the four
[Guest]: varnas can exist. Yeah, that's the position he starts with. And I think it's important
[Guest]: to recognize that Gandhi's feeling is way around India. I mean, he's, you know, he's
[Guest]: an outsider. He has to establish his authority of the political movement. He has to prove
[Guest]: his credentials as a social reformer. Caste is, you know, caste divisions, boundaries
[Guest]: are very pervasive in Hindu society. He is someone who does not know Sanskrit. He is
[Guest]: not a Brahmin. So there'll be questions about how he interprets tradition. And he started
[Guest]: to do several things at the same time. I mean, he's leading a movement for political freedom.
[Guest]: He is forging a compact with Hindus and Muslims, and he's trying to abolish untouchability.
[Guest]: And clearly he, if he has to move on all fronts, he has to move slowly. And I think the depth
[Guest]: of hostility to even his limited attempts to attack untouchability early on, from the
[Guest]: time in 1915, when he admits a Dalit family and his funding collapses, right, and is even
[Guest]: a possibility the whole of upper caste society in Ahmedabad ostracize him, to later on through
[Guest]: the twenties and thirties, when the most vicious and vehement attacks on him are not from Dalit
[Guest]: radicals, but from upper caste orthodox people, including attempts on his life. So I think
[Guest]: it's in that context that one has to understand why he moves slowly. You know, so among the
[Guest]: people who radicalize him, well before Ambedkar, is a man called T.K. Madhavan, who is a follower
[Guest]: of the great Malayali social reformer, Narayan Guru, who visits Gandhi in Tirunelveli in
[Guest]: 1921, when Gandhi is doing non-cooperation work. And he comes up from Kerala and says,
[Guest]: you know, you're against untouchability, that's good, but why can't Dalits enter temples?
[Guest]: And Gandhi says, no, no, no, I'm not sure, you know, at the moment, you know, that may
[Guest]: not be such a good idea. But in three or four years, he changes his mind and he blesses
[Guest]: the Vaikam Satyagraha, which is the start of the struggle to make Dalits equal in the
[Guest]: eyes of God. And if Dalits and upper caste Hindus are rubbing bodies, going together
[Guest]: for the temple, that is a major blow against untouchability. But Gandhi is moved along
[Guest]: that path by people more radical than him, to begin with Narayan Guru and his followers
[Guest]: and later on Ambedkar, of course. And of course, from advocating temple entry, he then advocates
[Guest]: later on intermarriage from the early 30s, when his own son, his youngest son marries
[Guest]: outside the caste and then further down the decade where he solemnized a series of marriages
[Guest]: between Dalits and non-Dalits. And once you advocate intermarriage, you've effectively
[Guest]: undermined the whole caste system. So I think the evolution of Gandhi's views is very important
[Guest]: that he's moving in a more egalitarian, more progressive, more radical direction. And one
[Guest]: must not cherry pick him, pick quotes from an earlier period of life and claim that he
[Amit Varma]: stood by those views all through.
[Amit Varma]: And is it sort of complicated to look at the utterances of a public intellectual who's
[Amit Varma]: also a politician? Because a public intellectual's imperatives are just to be true to his thoughts.
[Guest]: Absolutely. Absolutely. You're quite right. He was trying to move society in certain ways.
[Amit Varma]: Can a lot of his utterances also be a sort of hedging that while he's saying that yes,
[Amit Varma]: caste is bad, he at the same time doesn't want to piss off the orthodoxy too much. So
[Guest]: he hedges by saying that no.
[Guest]: Because he wants to build a broad-based coalition against the British at the same time. I mean,
[Guest]: in the old days, the Marxists attacked him for not advocating revolutionary violence
[Guest]: against Zamendars and expropriation of property. That's because he wanted Zamendars and landless
[Guest]: laborers both to be in the struggle for freedom. And he would have wanted, of course, a more
[Guest]: equal distribution of land that could come in time and through more gradualist methods.
[Guest]: Now there remains a major difference between him and Ambedkar, which you pointed to in
[Guest]: your initial remarks and questions, Amit, which is that it's a major philosophical difference.
[Guest]: Ambedkar thought that untouchability and caste distinctions were integral to Hinduism. And
[Guest]: hence the Dalits had to move away. In 1935, he says, I was born a Hindu, but I will not
[Guest]: die a Hindu. Ambedkar says this. He considers Islam, he considers Christianity, he considers
[Guest]: Sikhism and very late in life in 1956, long after Gandhi is dead, he embraces Buddhism,
[Guest]: but tragically dies six weeks later.
[Guest]: Now, so Ambedkar's position from 1935 was Hinduism is incapable of root and branch reform.
[Guest]: It can do cosmetic reform, but not root and branch reform. Whereas Gandhi thought, I can
[Guest]: save Hinduism by abolishing untouchability. So in that sense, Gandhi both lived and died
[Guest]: a Hindu, whereas Ambedkar felt that for his people, they had to escape the Hindu fold.
[Guest]: And that is the other philosophical differences between the two, which are in some ways equally
[Guest]: important. One is that Ambedkar came from a modernist, statist, quasi-socialist tradition
[Guest]: and felt the state is the agency of reform. You need laws, you need policies. And Gandhi
[Guest]: felt that social reform comes from within, from individuals reforming themselves, from
[Guest]: collective community action. That is the difference that can be reconciled between Gandhi and
[Guest]: Ambedkar. Because clearly, if you want to end caste discrimination totally, you need
[Guest]: both community renewal and purposive state action.
[Guest]: But the first philosophical difference, which is that can Dalits live a life of absolute
[Guest]: equality and self-respect within the Hindu fold, or do they have to go somewhere else?
[Guest]: It's still an open question. I mean, one can't really answer that definitively, either on
[Amit Varma]: the side of Gandhi or Ambedkar.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's an excellent quote I picked up from your book where Ambedkar says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the outcast is a by-product of the caste system. There will be outcasts as long as there is
[Amit Varma]: caste. Yes, yes, yes.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, caste is inextricably tied to Hinduism in his notion. And Gandhi sort
[Amit Varma]: of had this approach that, listen, you know, don't worry about it. It's, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: upper caste will reform through, you know, you appeal to their conscience and they will
[Amit Varma]: reform on their own. And there almost seems something condescending sometimes about his
[Amit Varma]: approach to Ambedkar. Like at one point, you quote him much later on referring to praising
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar as quote, intellectually superior to thousands of intelligent and educated caste
[Amit Varma]: Hindus, stop quote. And this is outrageously condescending. Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely.
[Guest]: He could be condescending towards the community too, more generally. For example, when Ambedkar
[Guest]: says, why doesn't the Harijan Sevak Sangh have Harijan? He says, no, it's the upper caste
[Guest]: Hindus who have to repent. You know, but I think if the Harijan Sevak Sangh had had upper
[Guest]: caste and Dalits together, and together they would have presented a joint front, I think
[Guest]: that like the Khilafat movement, that would have been more effective. So they are clearly,
[Guest]: you know, decisions he takes, statements he makes that are patronizing. But having said
[Guest]: that, I think it must be put on record that Gandhi did more than any other upper caste
[Guest]: Hindu in the history of modern India to delegitimize untouchability. I mean, he frequently abandoned
[Guest]: his political career to launch, you know, to go on a march against untouchability. He
[Guest]: risked his own, you know, status and career by taking on this question. He, as I said,
[Guest]: there were attempts on his life from 1915 onwards, he's preaching the abolition of untouchability.
[Guest]: So you could say he did more, he did more than anyone else in his position. I mean,
[Guest]: so Patel, Nehru, Bose, Madan Moliya Amalya, Dange, Nambudripad, Srinivas Shastri, all
[Guest]: the other Hindu leaders of the time, whether in the Congress, to the left of the Congress,
[Guest]: right of Lohia, Jayaprakash, none of them talked about untouchability or attacked it
[Guest]: so seriously and systematically as Gandhi. The only leader in the Congress party from
[Guest]: 1915 to 1948 in Gandhi's death, the only major leader in the Congress party who understood
[Guest]: the significance of Gandhi's campaign was Raja Gopalachari, no one else.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, it's telling that not only did he, um, uh, let in those, uh, the, the Dalit
[Amit Varma]: families who wanted to be in his ashram, but visitors to his ashram, as you've cited in
[Amit Varma]: your book, describe him eating out of the same plate, like someone had half a fruit
[Amit Varma]: and then shared it with Gandhi. And he, and I'll just talk about this. Right, right, right.
[Amit Varma]: And what also happens later on is that, uh, he starts this magazine called Harijan and
[Amit Varma]: he starts a society called Harijan Sevak Sangh. And both of these seem, it seemed to me as
[Amit Varma]: I was following the chronology in the book happened sort of after or in the middle of
[Amit Varma]: his heated debates. And it almost seemed in one sense that he's like, you know, I have
[Amit Varma]: been fighting for caste for so many years and now I am being challenged in this way
[Amit Varma]: and I will show my loyalty to the cause and I will call my, um, uh, magazine Harijan.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, and, and Rajaji saw this, that there was also a touch of condescension
[Guest]: and is calling the organization Harijan Sevak Sangh.
[Guest]: Yeah. And Rajaji says, call it anti untouchability league or untouchability abolition league,
[Guest]: because the idea is to abolish untouchability. And there's a bureaucratic, uh, you know,
[Guest]: objection saying we already printed the stationery, you know, is what, so we can't change the
[Guest]: name now. But in retrospect, Rajaji was absolutely farsighted on this because the name Harijan
[Guest]: has a condescending ring to it and has been rightly rejected and repudiated by Dalits
[Amit Varma]: today. And, uh, you know, Ambedkar's battles against, um, you know, Gandhi were always
[Amit Varma]: sort of civil, but very heated and strident. Like, uh, he spoke about how Gandhi wants
[Amit Varma]: to play a double role, uh, quote unquote data for Mahatma and a politician. And he wrote
[Amit Varma]: this book in July, 1945, what Congress and Gandhi have done to the untouchables, which
[Amit Varma]: was a scathing diatribe. It disturbed Gandhi. He asked Rajaji to write a rejoinder to it,
[Amit Varma]: which Rajaji eventually did. And you know, Ambedkar in a sense also, therefore through
[Amit Varma]: doubts on the whole independence project where he said that Dalits in India, untouchables
[Amit Varma]: in India have the same status as Negroes in the U S how will independence help us?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. And I think, but I think together, I mean, even as a historian, uh,
[Guest]: you know, uh, you, uh, look at it in context and you depict their battles and their struggles
[Guest]: and the arguments and the, but in retrospect, I think India needed both Gandhi and Ambedkar.
[Guest]: It needed, you know, a radical reform from below and a guilt-ridden, you know, upper
[Guest]: caste reformer from above, uh, to together delegitimize the caste system. And the real
[Guest]: tragedy, I mean, this is, this is something beyond the scope of my book, which ends with
[Guest]: it. The real tragedy of the struggle against caste discrimination is that after Gandhi's
[Guest]: death, the Gandhians abandoned it. Someone like Vinoba Bhave never took it up. You know,
[Guest]: it had to be an ongoing struggle. It had to be taken up by upper caste social reformers
[Guest]: in a completely selfless and systematic way. And they really didn't do it. So they abandoned
[Guest]: Gandhi. I mean, the Gandhians abandoned Gandhi in this respect after 1948.
[Amit Varma]: And even during the struggle, what was the attitude of the other office fellow leaders,
[Guest]: so to say like Nehru, Patel? They were not really very, they thought that it was a deviation
[Amit Varma]: from the struggle for political freedom. That's essentially how they saw it. And how do you
[Guest]: personally, how do you view Ambedkar? I mean, I view him as an extraordinary figure, a person
[Guest]: of great courage. I'm going to take on the Mahatma who was that much older than him,
[Guest]: a brilliant scholar, but at the same time, a polemicist, someone who maybe found it hard
[Guest]: to get along with people because he was, you know, uh, a person who was so brilliant. Uh,
[Guest]: you know, he essentially did not have, uh, he had, uh, people who he disagreed with and
[Guest]: people who followed him. You know, he does not seem to have had, I mean, there's some
[Guest]: indications that he may have had an emotional relationship with an English woman to whom
[Guest]: he dedicates one of his books, but that's not being fleshed out. And later on, he had
[Guest]: some kind of companionship with his second wife. Uh, but he was, maybe it's, he was lonely
[Guest]: because that's how, uh, he still trusts him in that role. He still trusts him in the role
[Guest]: of someone who was too independent minded to loyally follow Gandhi. And because he was
[Guest]: too independent minded to loyally follow Gandhi, he had to make common cause with the British,
[Guest]: which alienated him from his fellow Indians. So he's an extraordinary figure, but it's
[Guest]: the element of both great heroism and some tragedy in, you know, in his life. You know,
[Guest]: I obviously, you know, it's, uh, admire both people enormously. I mean, and one of the
[Guest]: interesting aspects of my book, I mean, now that I look back on it is that Ambedkar is
[Guest]: much more important than Jinnah. You know, so if you look at, compare my biography, Amit,
[Guest]: with biographies of Gandhi written 15, 10 years ago, 20 years ago, 30 years ago, 40
[Guest]: years ago, 50 years ago, you will find in those older biographies, Jinnah looms much
[Guest]: larger than Ambedkar. That's right. Okay. And I realized this only when I finished the
[Guest]: book, you know, and Jinnah is there, Jinnah is an important figure. Ambedkar is much more
[Guest]: important because Jinnah was merely posing a political challenge to Gandhi, whereas Ambedkar
[Guest]: was posing a political and a moral challenge to Gandhi. And the debate between Gandhi and
[Guest]: Jinnah ended in 1947 because Pakistan was created. The debate between Gandhi and Ambedkar
[Guest]: continues so long as there's caste discrimination, that debate continues. So it just strikes
[Guest]: me. I mean, someone should do a kind of analysis of my biography versus previous biographies,
[Guest]: purely in terms of the number of index entries that Ambedkar and Jinnah have here. I mean,
[Guest]: most notoriously Attenborough wrote Ambedkar out of his film totally. Ambedkar doesn't
[Guest]: think, okay, and Jinnah is the fall guy, the kind of the villain. But I'm sure if you look
[Guest]: at Walpert's book on Gandhi or Rajmohan Gandhi's book on Gandhi or Judith Brown's book on Gandhi
[Guest]: or B. R. Nanda's book on Gandhi, all very good books. So Jeffrey Ashe's book on Gandhi,
[Guest]: Louis Fisher's book on Gandhi. I have a photo of Louis Fisher and Ambedkar in my book, you
[Guest]: know, so they knew each other, but I suspect Louis Fisher's book, sometimes I read it,
[Guest]: you know, Jinnah will be much more important than Ambedkar in the narrative. So I think
[Guest]: he was Gandhi's greatest, most insightful, most persistent, and most courageous critic.
[Guest]: That's what Ambedkar was in Gandhi's life. He was many other things besides. I mean,
[Guest]: he was a constitutionalist, a scholar and economist, but in Gandhi's life, I think he
[Amit Varma]: was his, he was Gandhi's most important interlocutor. And like Gandhi, he actually contained multitudes
[Amit Varma]: in terms of he wrote so much and he changed his mind so often that it's very hard to sort
[Amit Varma]: of get a grip of the man. And I haven't read much Ambedkar. So I'll throw to you a question
[Amit Varma]: a friend asked me recently, and I don't have an answer to it, which is if one wants to
[Amit Varma]: discover Ambedkar's thought, what is the best place to start? What are the best books? On
[Guest]: him or by him? You see, the best place to start is Byron Rodrigues, who's a very fine
[Guest]: scholar political theorist from Mangalore, did a book called The Essential Writings
[Guest]: of B. R. Ambedkar, which he edited, and which has a 50 page introduction, and which is a
[Guest]: selection of Ambedkar's writings. That is one book I would recommend. The other book
[Guest]: I would recommend is by the late D. R. Nagaraj, who was again, I'm sorry to recommend two
[Guest]: books by residents of Karnataka, fellow citizens of Karnataka, but that's how they're both
[Guest]: first-rate books. D. R. Nagaraj was a brilliant intellectual, Kannada, bilingual Kannada English
[Guest]: intellectual who died tragically young. And he wrote a book called The Flaming Feet, which
[Guest]: first appeared in 1993. And his student Prithvi Dutta Chandra Shobhi has revised and expanded
[Guest]: it in a new edition with Permanent Black published, which is an account of the Dalit movement
[Guest]: in Karnataka and Ambedkar's place in it. I'd say those are two very important books. There's
[Guest]: a lot of hagiographic, worshipful writing on Ambedkar, including by scholars, which
[Guest]: I don't take very seriously. There's a reasonably good book by Eleanor Zelliot published 50
[Guest]: years ago, or the Bahar movement per se, which Ambedkar led. Dhananjay Kheer's biography
[Guest]: of Ambedkar is unequalled for factual information, but very badly written and put together. And
[Guest]: the world awaits a good critical biography of Ambedkar. I think he's a figure who has
[Guest]: just not been written about with the kind of analytical robustness that he deserves.
[Amit Varma]: I know you must be exhausted after these Gandhi books, but is that something you'd ever do?
[Guest]: It has been suggested to me, Amit, but I won't do it for a few years, if at all. I mean,
[Guest]: some younger scholars should do it. Again, there's room for many books on Ambedkar. There's
[Guest]: some writings on Marathi. I don't read Marathi, so I don't know how good they are. You need
[Guest]: a really good, proper biography. And then you need several good thematic books on him,
[Guest]: you know, which take up his constitutional thinking and so on and so forth. And like
[Guest]: was the Rajaji, you know, Rajaji is another great figure whom the last good book, Vasanthi
[Guest]: Srinivasan wrote a short book on his political thought, but he again awaits rediscovery.
[Guest]: There's too much written on Gandhi and Patel and Nehru and not enough on people like Rajaji
[Amit Varma]: and Ambedkar, of quality.
[Amit Varma]: So getting back to the subject of our episode, which is Gandhi, another sort of area he had,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where one can have conflicting views about what Gandhi thought about it and how
[Amit Varma]: he acted is women. And, you know, early on in your book, you quote him as saying that
[Amit Varma]: in a nation where sort of women are not part of active political and social life, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the nation walks on one leg only, stop quote, which is a very eloquent way of putting it.
[Amit Varma]: But his view of women was always sort of very paternalistic, not just, not just in the way
[Amit Varma]: he treated Kasurba and his own family in that Hindu patriarch way as he described, but he
[Amit Varma]: was just paternalistic, like much later when he's responding to a letter by a correspondent
[Amit Varma]: who's written to him, he writes about his, his view of the modern girl. And that goes,
[Amit Varma]: quote, I have a fear that the modern girl loves to be Juliet to half a dozen Romeos.
[Amit Varma]: She loves adventure. My correspondent seems to represent the unusual type. The modern
[Amit Varma]: girl dresses not to protect herself from wind, rain or sun, but to attract attention. She
[Amit Varma]: improves upon nature by painting herself and looking extraordinary, stop quote. And obviously
[Amit Varma]: this, this got a heated response from the young ladies who, you know, nice feminist
[Amit Varma]: response. And then he kind of responded to this with, you know, what, what reminded me
[Amit Varma]: recently of another name I didn't think I would take in this episode of Rani Mukherjee,
[Amit Varma]: where he seems to do a bit of victim blaming later, where he says, stop quote, the girls
[Amit Varma]: must learn the art of protecting themselves against the ruffianly behavior of man, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. So he's, you know, while he does pay lip service to women being equal to men and
[Amit Varma]: being an equal part of the nation, it's this kind of very paternalistic.
[Guest]: So, you know, one of the episodes that you described, you know, this is one of the highlights
[Guest]: of doing archival research. So Gandhi writes on women, where he says that, you know, they're
[Guest]: looking for, that Julia's looking for Romeos and, you know, they should dress more modestly
[Guest]: and so on. There's a response from these women of Bengal. Gandhi then writes a follow up
[Guest]: where he quotes a little bit of that response and addresses it. Now in the Sabarmati archives,
[Guest]: I found the entire response, the handwritten response, the wonderful letter, you know,
[Guest]: it says 11 women of Bengal, and I quote much more than Gandhi does. And it is a brilliant
[Guest]: feminist, you know, critique of male voyeurism, victim shaming, all the things that we talk
[Guest]: about now, you know, and it's superbly written, but it's a great deal of intellectual rigor
[Guest]: and self-confidence. And it's there in the Sabarmati archives, the whole thing, which
[Guest]: is a joy to discover this, that in 1937, there were these women, you know, writing this kind
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's his attitude to women is complicated. You know, he is, again, evolving.
[Guest]: But again, I think he is, he must be given credit for bringing women into public life.
[Guest]: You know, Madhu Kishwar, which is another name, you may be surprised to have me quote
[Guest]: in this context, but I'll quote up positively and affirmatively, because there was a Madhu
[Guest]: Kishwar before, there is today's Madhu Kishwar. Many years ago, she wrote a very good piece,
[Guest]: you know, in her more sober scholarly avatar, which is what she was then. She wrote a first
[Guest]: state piece in the EPW called Gandhi and Women, which kind of analyzed the contradictions
[Guest]: in Gandhi's worldview. And while pointing to his patronizing attitude towards women,
[Guest]: also says something quite striking. She said, Gandhi brought more women into public life
[Guest]: than Mao, Lenin, Stalin, Churchill, de Gaulle, Roosevelt, which is absolutely true. I mean,
[Guest]: in 1924, Gandhi comes out of jail. The Congress wants him as president. He says, no, Sarojini
[Guest]: Naidu should be president. They said, no, you have to come be president because you
[Guest]: have to reconcile the party. It's split between Swarajis and no changers. He said, okay. But
[Guest]: next year, he insists that Sarojini Naidu is made president.
[Amit Varma]: The first Indian born woman.
[Guest]: And in 1925, it was inconceivable. There were no democratic women who were senators. Now
[Guest]: you have Elizabeth Warren. I mean, now, of course, the USA is far ahead of us. But back
[Guest]: in those days, you may not even have had a city council president who was a woman, right?
[Guest]: And here you have the president of the major national party. Women participate in the Salt
[Guest]: March and Quit India Movement. They're in the Congress Working Committee. So, which
[Guest]: is, whereas, the Bolshevik revolution is largely, almost all male. Chinese communist movement
[Guest]: is totally male. De Gaulle, Churchill, and so on are much more contemptuous of woman
[Guest]: power and woman autonomy and dignity. This is not to defend Gandhi, but to contextualize
[Guest]: it. That, you know, by the standards of today, he was wanting. By the standards of his time,
[Guest]: he was in advance of other political leaders who were his contemporaries. I think that's
[Amit Varma]: something which must be placed on record.
[Amit Varma]: Now I want to move on to, you know, what I've labeled over here as obsessions. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Gandhi's obsessions in a sense. And my favorite sentence in your whole book, excuse
[Amit Varma]: me for saying this, but I'll have to quote it. My favorite sentence in your whole book,
[Amit Varma]: which made me LOL, so to say, was, start quote, on 14th April, 1938, Gandhi awoke with an
[Amit Varma]: erection and despite efforts to control his excitement, had a masturbatory experience.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And this is a very funny passage because then obviously the obsession in question,
[Amit Varma]: which I'm talking about is celibacy and he's deeply disturbed by this. And he thinks of
[Amit Varma]: even going public with it till, you know, Rajaji and all in alarm managed to stop him
[Amit Varma]: and because he would of course be the butt of jokes if he went public with it. And, um,
[Amit Varma]: and celibacy was one of his sort of personal improvement obsessions throughout his life.
[Amit Varma]: He insisted that his children be celibate. He didn't let them marry. And, uh, he would
[Amit Varma]: write editorials in the various magazines. He did talking about the importance of preserving
[Amit Varma]: the vital fluids. Uh, I mean,
[Guest]: No, it is, it is. I mean, this goes back to volume one where I talk about how he became
[Guest]: a Brahmachari and you know, how he learned from Tolstoy and Raichand Bhai. Oh, he, how
[Guest]: he followed them, not learned was, you know, convinced by the argument that Brahmacharya
[Guest]: was crucial and preserving the vital fluids was also. And of course he carries on in India.
[Guest]: I mean, I quote earlier, well before this episode of 1938, I quote some lectures he
[Guest]: gave to his, uh, ashramites in the early twenties, where he said, you know, you have to preserve
[Guest]: the semen and all of that. And very important. So there is some, uh, some kind of a irrational
[Guest]: mumbo jumbo about all of this. Now, there was a paragraph in my book, which I cut out
[Guest]: about that 1938 masturbatory experience, which is, I can recall now, because it's quite amusing.
[Guest]: We know it was in Delhi. Now we don't know, but it's very likely it was in Gandhi's son's
[Guest]: house. So he was having this experience in the house of his son, where there were three
[Guest]: of his grandchildren also living now, which may have shamed him even more. You know that
[Guest]: here is a elderly grandfather, you know, having this kind of experience, right? Now I didn't
[Guest]: have evidence that it was the son's house. He could have been staying in a guest house.
[Guest]: So I didn't put it in, but it is something that of course, uh, uh, much later in 1946,
[Guest]: when he has, uh, the desire to test himself in Noah Khalil because he feels that his world
[Guest]: is coming around him and he has this extraordinary, this is really self delusion. This is the
[Guest]: greatest self delusion of Gandhi's life, that if he controls his sexual urges, Hindus and
[Guest]: Muslims will stop butchering one another, which is how he feels in 1946.
[Guest]: I mean, the reason he does those last experiments in Brahmacharya is that he feels that somehow
[Guest]: he has failed and because he has failed, Hindus and Muslims are butchering one another. That
[Guest]: is completely deluded, but it is, it is an extraordinary obsession. You know, this, the
[Guest]: desire to control his sexuality and, uh, when they appear to be, uh, unbeating failures
[Guest]: as in this masturbating experience, uh, the sense of guilt, self remorse, self flagellation
[Amit Varma]: that overcomes him, you know, uh, is
[Amit Varma]: No, when you talk about 1946, I mean, it's a, it's a stunning episode because he, he
[Amit Varma]: calls his grand niece Manu with her father over and he says that, listen, I want to test
[Amit Varma]: myself by sleeping on the same bed as you. And the reason for this is that Hindus and
[Amit Varma]: Muslims need to stop killing each other. And this is the only way. And that just seems
[Amit Varma]: very bizarre. And in the forties, there are a lot of bizarre things happening in the sense
[Amit Varma]: another of his obsessions. I don't know if it's fair to call it an obsession because
[Amit Varma]: it's also one of his great contributions to the world is the obsession with nonviolence.
[Amit Varma]: And he actually, you know, before that in the thirties, he advises the Jews of Germany,
[Amit Varma]: not to resist Hitler, to fight him with passive resistance. When the war starts, he wants
[Amit Varma]: a British to abandon their glorious homes and let Hitler occupy them and do the whole
[Amit Varma]: passive resistance things. He says the same kind of thing to Chiang Kai-shek. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, by this time where he's in the seventies and the forties have begun first, he's telling
[Amit Varma]: everyone to be nonviolent, you know, be nonviolent against Hitler, be nonviolent against Germany,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah. On the other hand, all these experiments are going on. And if it was anyone
[Amit Varma]: else without his enormous stature, you'd just be regarded as completely cuckoo.
[Guest]: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I think, you know, to go to return to the celibacy experiments,
[Guest]: I think he is desperately lonely at this time. You know, he has no one to speak to. C.F.
[Guest]: Andrews is dead. Tagore is dead. Mahadev is dead. Kasturba is dead. Jamnalal Bajaj, who
[Guest]: was his adopted son, to whom he was close to the end of his own sons, is dead. And he's
[Guest]: alone and lonely and confused in Bengal and does this completely nutty thing. Now, I'm
[Guest]: sure Mahadev could have told him, you're crazy. Don't do this. Hindus and Muslims are butchering
[Guest]: one another in spite of all you've done to stop it. It's not your failure. It's got nothing
[Guest]: to do with your personal sexuality. But I think in that he was lonely, confused, and
[Guest]: he succumbs to this bizarre delusion.
[Amit Varma]: Great. So we need to wind up in 20 minutes. So what I'll do is I won't go back to the
[Amit Varma]: narrative of the book. Instead, I'll urge all the listeners to just buy it and read
[Amit Varma]: it because it's it's a fascinating story. And it's obviously all the spoilers are done
[Amit Varma]: because it's history. And you know what happened, but it's incredibly fascinating. Anyway, I
[Amit Varma]: just want to end with a bunch of sort of bigger questions about Gandhi and about India. Um,
[Amit Varma]: question number one, you you quote a conversation he has with Meenu Masani, who's then a socialist
[Amit Varma]: later becomes classical liberal, but then a socialist, where he tells Meenu Masani that
[Amit Varma]: my objection to your socialism is coercion. Yeah, right, which seems very enlightened
[Amit Varma]: and makes me happy. It seems almost libertarian. But, uh, and which he doesn't entirely follow
[Amit Varma]: in his own life or prescriptions or whatever, because a lot of his, but one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that does stand out about Gandhi from a lot of big leaders is that he privileges the means
[Amit Varma]: over the end. You know, he's, is that something that made its mark in Indian life and Indian
[Guest]: thought?
[Guest]: I think he's that sets him apart from, you know, political leaders everywhere, not just
[Guest]: in India, but before I come to just go back to Meenu Masani, there's a line that would
[Guest]: have gotten you when you read it was when Meenu Masani, who's then a fervent socialist
[Guest]: presents him the manifesto of the Congress Socialist Party in 1934. And it says, when
[Guest]: we come to power, we will nationalize all instruments of production. And Gandhi says,
[Guest]: Rabindranath Tagore is a marvel and instrument of production. Will you nationalize it? Brilliant.
[Guest]: That is totally brilliant. Right. So, you know, all freedom of all kinds, including
[Guest]: a study of expression is going to be subject to Stalinist control and nationalization.
[Guest]: You know, uh, I mean, I mean, they're kind of, uh, uh, there are three kinds of politicians.
[Guest]: One is kind of divided, you know, uh, and I think Modi and Indira Gandhi fall into that
[Guest]: divided category of people who want power for its own sake, but also by their own lights
[Guest]: think they want to do good. Right. That's one category. Another category is who just
[Guest]: want power and want to exercise it ruthlessly, immorally. And, uh, you know, Amit Shah would
[Guest]: fall in that category and probably many African dictators and so on and so forth. Right. Now,
[Guest]: Gandhi is someone who of course has a great capacity to be pragmatic, to compromise, but
[Guest]: on some issues, he will not compromise. On some moral issues. And we discussed this again
[Guest]: in the first episode, nonviolence and Hindu Muslim harmony are for him absolutely, you
[Guest]: know, sacrosanct. And also finally, he would want before launching a nonviolent movement
[Guest]: to keep all the avenues of communication, of conciliation, of negotiation open. So till
[Guest]: the last moment he would want to discuss with the viceroy. Uh, and I think this is all with
[Guest]: Ambedkar or with Jinnah, you know, he would keep channels open all the time. I think these
[Guest]: are ways in which he really differs from people who take more hard line stance.
[Amit Varma]: My second question, and this is often raised, is that, do you think that these individuals
[Amit Varma]: were really so consequential or would India have gotten independence anyway? I mean, the
[Amit Varma]: British were practically bankrupt after the war and so on.
[Guest]: No, we got a different kind of independence. And I think that several respects in which,
[Guest]: I mean, I think many aspects of the constitution, though people claim is borrowed from, you
[Guest]: know, the 35 constitution and so on, or many aspects of, uh, political practice. And again,
[Guest]: we discussed this in our first episode. So federalism, you know, uh, this is whole, uh,
[Guest]: I have, uh, uh, for the last five years, uh, from before Narendra Modi came to power, telling
[Guest]: warning against apocalyptic talk about fascism, because I believe that, uh, federalism will
[Guest]: save India, you know, from authoritarian rule, you know, so, and we owe federalism, including
[Guest]: linguistic federalism to Gandhi.
[Guest]: Now, so I think the sense of debate, dialogue, pluralism, we would have had, and also social
[Guest]: reform, I mean, equality for women and Dalits, at least under the law, not in everyday life.
[Guest]: I mean, it's still denied in everyday life. We don't have equal rights in everyday life.
[Guest]: Dalits in outside the cities and sometimes not even in the cities have equal rights in
[Guest]: everyday life. But I think these are ways in which Gandhi prepared us for a much more
[Guest]: meaningful freedom than Aurobindo Ghosh or Subhash Chandra Bose or Bhagat Singh or Veer
[Guest]: Savarkar or any of the other currently fashionable icons could have brought us.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So my final question, which is a slightly complicated question, and it's a three part
[Amit Varma]: question, uh, which is basic, the basic big question is how would Gandhi have reacted
[Amit Varma]: to India as it is today? And I'll break it up into three parts. One is, would he have
[Amit Varma]: seen a resonance between the British empire that he fought against and the modern Indian
[Amit Varma]: state? For example, many of the laws under which he was arrested, 124A which is sedition,
[Amit Varma]: 153A, 295A still exist and are still regularly used for political purposes. He protested
[Amit Varma]: the salt tax in Gandhi famously, but the salt tax today is many times more than what it
[Amit Varma]: was then. In fact, you could argue that taxation as a whole is far more oppressive and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So one is at the level, how would he have thought about a parallel between the oppression
[Amit Varma]: that you got from the British empire and the oppression that you got from your own rulers?
[Guest]: So I think 124A and those other acts, he clearly says in young India, 1929, I think if memory
[Guest]: serves, he says, when we come to power, we will remove 124A. He says that clearly that
[Guest]: hasn't happened. In fact, many ways it's become more arbitrary, you know, the misuse of, of
[Guest]: those laws. I mean, the recent arrest of the journalist in Manipur and many other examples
[Guest]: of that kind. Now economics, it's more complicated. You know, I think Gandhi is to be trusted
[Guest]: in many ways, but perhaps not so much as an economist. I think his suspicion of the excessive
[Guest]: powers accruing to the state, whether in regulating everyday life or in regulating the economy,
[Guest]: I think are salutary and Rajaji takes those forward in his own formation of the Sandhya
[Guest]: Party. But on sedition, he explicitly says that when we come to power, 124 and 124A will
[Guest]: go and they haven't gone 70 years later.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. The second part of the three part question is a thought experiment. If he was a young
[Amit Varma]: Kashmiri today, would he fight for Kashmir's independence? Because you could make the same
[Amit Varma]: case for Kashmir's independence against people they see as a foreign occupying power and
[Amit Varma]: behave pretty brutally as an Indian would in those days against the British empire,
[Amit Varma]: which was an occupying power and which didn't even always behave that brutally.
[Guest]: Look, I, it's hard to say. I can only say that when Gandhi died in 1948, the first Kashmir
[Guest]: war had just begun and he took the side of the Indian army. In fact, unlike in the case
[Guest]: of his advice to the Jews to resist Hitler non-violently, in 1948, he said this is an
[Guest]: unfair incursion by the Pakistanis and we must resist it. So he supported the Indian
[Guest]: army. Much has changed since then. I mean, that was a different Kashmir with Sheikh Abdullah
[Guest]: who was generally secular and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Today, you know, I think the position of Rajaji, which I've described at great length in India
[Guest]: after Gandhi, the peace proposal that he held out, which Nehru accepted just before Nehru
[Guest]: died and then, you know, Sheikh Abdullah went to, was released under that peace proposal
[Guest]: in 1964 and went to meet Ayub Khan and so on, which is a kind of confederation, India-Pakistan-Kashmir
[Guest]: confederation, you know, soft borders, you know, the kind of Manmohan Singh line of soft
[Guest]: borders, no change in line of control, greater autonomy to Kashmiris on either side of the
[Guest]: border. I don't think you're an advocate of independence. I think independence opens
[Guest]: a Pandora's box of different kinds. You know, he said, we must as Indians, certainly he
[Guest]: would oppose pellet guns, pellet guns to the Kashmiris when the Jats and the Gujars and
[Guest]: the Patidars are treated, you know, with water cannons, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe he'd have begun as he began in South Africa anyway, as a moderate petitioning and
[Guest]: trying to work within the system.
[Guest]: Because Kashmir is very complicated and, you know, Kashmir is a situation in which I've
[Guest]: thought about very deeply and, you know, and I've written about also at some length and,
[Guest]: you know, the Indian state has much to answer for, the Pakistani state has much to answer
[Guest]: for, but so do the Jihadis of Kashmir. I mean, what happened to the Kashmiri Pandits is unconscionable.
[Guest]: They were purged and expelled and no amount of, you know, euphemism can, you know, excuse
[Guest]: that. I mean, this, the Indian left is in denial about, forget the, the Indian left
[Guest]: is in denial, the Kashmiris are in denial about how they treated the Pandits.
[Guest]: And I think the moral case for Kashmiri independence absolutely evaporated once they kicked out
[Guest]: the Pandits. So, and I think Gandhi would have recognized that. I mean, the treatment
[Guest]: of everywhere else in India, Muslims are insecure, vulnerable, occasionally persecuted, but
[Guest]: in one state of the union, Kashmir, it's the Hindus who are insecure, persecuted, marginalized
[Guest]: and expelled. So I think that the moral case for Kashmiri independence absolutely disappeared
[Guest]: when not only were they thrown out, not a single leader of the Kashmiri freedom struggle
[Guest]: atoned for it. They were in 1989, they fled. It took 15 years for the so-called moderate
[Guest]: among the Kashmiri Huriyat, like the Maulvi Farooq to go and to a Pandit camp in Jammu
[Guest]: and he probably only went once and God knows that he's never gone back again. So I think
[Guest]: the moral case for Kashmiri independence disappeared once the Pandits were expelled and the way
[Amit Varma]: in which they were expelled.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. And we should do an episode on that sometime, if you're willing. The last
[Amit Varma]: part of the last question is that if Gandhi was in this modern world and he was notoriously
[Amit Varma]: suspicious of modernity with technology, medicine, machinery, all of those things, and if he
[Amit Varma]: was alive today in the world of Twitter, say here a Twitter account, what would he be like?
[Amit Varma]: What would he be fighting for?
[Guest]: Well, let me answer that very elliptically and cryptically in the words of Shiv Vishwanathan.
[Guest]: Shiv Vishwanathan once wrote, Gandhi famously said, when he visited England in 1931, what
[Guest]: would you think of Western civilization? And he said, I think it would be a good idea.
[Guest]: Now, if he came back to India and was asked, what do you think of Indian civilization? He
[Guest]: would say that too would be a good idea.
[Amit Varma]: Ram, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do pick up Ram Guha's fantastic books on Gandhi,
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi before India, and his new book, Gandhi, the years to change the world at Amazon or
[Amit Varma]: your local bookstore. You can follow Ram on Twitter at Ram underscore Guha. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: at seen unseen.in and thingpragati.com. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: How aware do you think you are of your laws and rights? Do you look up to laws when you
[Unknown]: are caught up in situations? Do you know what your rights are when you're stuck somewhere
[Unknown]: bad? Well, here's a show that can help you move an inch closer to being aware of what
[Unknown]: your rights are. Tune into Know Your Kanoon with me Amar Rana. This is a podcast meant
[Unknown]: to answer all your law related queries. Catch Know Your Kanoon every week on the IBM website
[Unknown]: or the app or anywhere you get your podcasts from.